---
title: "Relationship between item characteristics and detection of Differential Item Functioning under the MIMIC model"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2019-08-01-dif-paper
excerpt: 'In this study, we show that rates of identifying DIF items are higher when the anchor set is made up of highly discriminating items. We also show that DIF items are more easily detected if they have high discrimination and at least moderate difficulty (if using a correctly specified anchor).'
date: 2019-08-01
venue: 'Psychological Test and Assessment Modeling'
paperurl: 'https://www.psychologie-aktuell.com/fileadmin/Redaktion/Journale/ptam-2019-2/06_Reboucas.pdf'
#citation: 'Rebouças, D. A., & Cheng, Y. (2019). Relationship between item characteristics and detection of Differential Item Functioning under the MIMIC model. <i>Psychological Test and Assessment Modeling</i>, <i>61</i>(<i>2</i>), 227–257.'
---

Differential item functioning (DIF) occurs when individuals of the same true latent ability or psychological trait from different demographic populations are found to have different chances of endorsing an item category. 

The ability to identify such items depends on many factors, including the __sample size__ of each demographic group, __average true latent trait__ scores in each group, the chosen __DIF assessment method__, the __magnitude__ of DIF effect and the __quality__ of the anchor set.

An anchor is a group of items free of DIF, which establish a common metric between groups. If the anchor is contaminated, that is, if it contains a DIF item, the common metric is inappropriate. The current literature rarely addresses the relationship between _item parameters_, _anchor selection_, and subsequent _DIF detection_. 

In this two-part study, we show that rates of identifying DIF items are higher when the anchor set is made up of highly discriminating items. We also show that DIF items are more easily detected if they have high discrimination and at least moderate difficulty (if using a correctly specified anchor), given a fixed DIF effect size.

[Access paper here](https://www.psychologie-aktuell.com/fileadmin/Redaktion/Journale/ptam-2019-2/06_Reboucas.pdf)

Recommended citation: Rebouças, D. A., & Cheng, Y. (2019). Relationship between item characteristics and detection of Differential Item Functioning under the MIMIC model. <i>Psychological Test and Assessment Modeling</i>, <i>61</i>(<i>2</i>), 227–257.
